Once around Luhman 16.
So, Luhman 16 lies in the southern
constellation of Vela. It's marked on
the map there to the left-hand side of
the diagram, little red dot.
Um and the bright stars of Vela are over
the other side of the constellation, uh
linked up in that green pattern.
Now, this is going to be very
challenging for anyone to try and track
down. It's very faint, magnitude 16.2,
and it's set against a very rich star
field. So, you even if you did take a
deep sky image, you will get so many
dots in the image that it will be quite
difficult to work out exactly which
one's which.
This is an image from the WISE
Wide-field Infrared Survey, and it's the
orange-colored thing in the center
there, um against all those other
orange-colored dots. If you see what I
mean, it'd be quite hard to pin this one
down.
What's interesting about it is how close
it is to us.
The parallax showed just half an arc
second, which is huge, and that puts it
close by, just 6.5 light-years away,
making it the third closest system after
Alpha Centauri at 4.2 light-years, and
Barnard's Star just squeaks in at six.
This is nearly the same, it's 6.5, so
it's just further away than Barnard's
Star.
Um and the other object on the screen
there, also discovered by the WISE
survey, um is the the fourth closest
object, there 8550714.
Um we'll talk about that in another
video.
So, actually, Luhman 16 turns out to be
the closest system to Alpha Centauri.
It's just 3.6 light-years from the
primary group, Alpha Centauri A and B,
and 3.5 light-years away from Proxima
Centauri.
Uh
so, uh
before Luhman 16 was discovered, the
solar system was actually the closest
known system to Alpha Centauri, but uh
now Luhman 16 pips us
at just 3.6.
It moves across the sky with significant
proper motion,
and you can see it in this little
animation. It's a little bit indistinct,
but you can see the two components
dancing around each other, and taking
this looping pattern across the sky.
It's moving away from us. We can measure
the Doppler shift and tell that it's
getting further away, and so it was
actually closer to us um 36,000 years
ago at just five light-years, so still
further away than Alpha Centauri is at
the moment, but it would have actually
been closer than Barnard's Star at that
point.
And it's possibly moving in
a grouping called the Oceanus Co-moving
Group of about 50 objects that seem to
share the same trajectory around the
galaxy, and were possibly formed in a
star cluster dating back about 500
million years, so roughly two orbits of
the galaxy ago.
And uh
that's
probably a young star cluster born at
that stage that's gradually then broken
up as uh it perturbations of gravity
have deflected the individual stars onto
the slightly varying trajectories.
Um so, we know quite a lot about where
this is and how it's moving, and uh you
can measure it on the sky with both
parallax for the distance and from the
proper motion there.
But in 2013, this is when it was
determined that it was a binary.
The Gemini South Telescope generated the
inset image at the top right there of
the pair of objects, really quite a
clear image showing that the one object
that WISE could see is in fact two. And
Gaia has shown that we have a 27 and a
half-year orbit for the two going round
each other at 3.6 astronomical units, so
the outer edge of the asteroid belt sort
of
not as far away from the sun as
Jupiter's orbit, that's about 5.2, so
a modest-size close orbit, but not extra
tight.
Physically, these two objects are
.2 and 29.4
times the mass of Jupiter.
Luhman 16A, the more massive one, is a
bit hotter with a temperature of 1,400
K,
and the smaller one 1,200 K,
but otherwise fairly similar, and this
puts them fair and square into the brown
dwarf category.
Brown dwarfs are anything larger than a
gas giant at about 13 solar masses all
the way up to about 75 to 80 solar
masses, at which point nuclear fusion
can kick off, and you get a red dwarf
star.
Um but we further subdivide the
brown dwarfs into three classes, L, T,
and Y,
based on their capabilities
for carrying out limited
versions of nuclear fusion. So, the
hottest ones, the most massive ones, the
L class, are powerful enough to fuse any
lithium that they are given to release
some energy, even though they can't
carry out the first step of the normal
fusion, where they turn hydrogen into
helium, they can burn up uh the lithium,
combining it with hydrogen, and
effectively it's nuclear fission of
lithium. You add hydrogen to it, and you
split it up into a pair of nuclei that
are the nuclei of helium and
uh tritium, depending on whether it's
lithium-6 or lithium-7, as which isotope
it was.
The less massive ones, T class, can't do
that, they don't get hot enough,
but they can use any deuterium that they
set out out with in the initial makeup
of the object. So, they can release a
bit of extra energy, and they will heat
themselves up a little bit, so you can
see that the surface temperature is
going to be somewhere in the 500 to
1,500 K,
whereas L type, it's 1,500 to 3,000,
where you would be a red dwarf at 3,000
really.
And the coolest ones are Y class, which
are um
inactive in terms of any form of nuclear
fusion at all, and powered entirely by
the heat of formation,
the gravitational potential energy being
released as they formed and as they
differentiate with heavier material
sinking into the center. And those can
be anything from 250 to 500 K. So, so,
uh the equivalent of a
a warm sunny day or a
at the bottom end of that range, a cold
North Pole day,
um or up to uh several hundred degrees
Celsius.
Now, Luhman A is on the borderline, it's
at 1,430
K,
so it's of either a very hot
T or a very cold L class, depending on
what your
uh diff definition actually is, and some
of these definitions are a little bit
loose.
B is a bit cooler at 1,200, so it's
really in the T class, in that
middleweight category.
We've detected cloud bands on the
surface using polarized light off the
Luhman A, and this is an artist's
impression, not a real photograph, of
course, on the right-hand side here, but
similar, perhaps, to the cloud belts of
Jupiter.
And indeed, being able to look with the
VLT in Chile and see hot clouds on the
surface. So, these images here show
clouds moving around as the object is
rotating.
Looking at that dance of the proper
motion across the sky, and tracking the
objects, you can clearly see the way
they're orbiting around each other,
but you can also detect, perhaps, a
measurable wobble in the motion,
so-called astrometry,
whereby
you can reveal the presence of unseen
companions, in other words, planets, and
maybe we're beginning to see that here,
but it's not confirmed. So, the James
Webb Space Telescope has had a really
good look and tried to find anything as
small as the moons of Jupiter that might
be in orbit around these guys, and
actually revealed nothing to this stage.
So, it's possible that there are still
some small objects, or that they're
orbiting further away from the main
bodies, creating such a slow and low
effect that we haven't been able to
detect it. So,
it's ongoing research on this one. So,
thanks very much, that was Once Around
Luhman 16, and I hope you enjoyed it.